Major changes in version 1.99.3:

* clu2c does not show elapsed time.

* clu2c make command does not create Depend and Location; now module
dependencies are embedded in generated C files.

* Removed options for clu2c: -B, -D; removed commands for clu2c:
bindir, dir, escape.  Now output files are always created in the
current working directory.

* Now C files genereated by clu2c and plink include only one header:
<clu2c.h>.  Old headers (<clu2c/clu2c.h>, <clu2c/type.h>, and
<clu2c/glo.h>) still work but will be unavailable in future releases.

* For each library option `-lfoo', clulink checks if the file
`libfoo.c' exists in the same directory as the specified `libfoo.a'
does.  If such a file exists, clulink appends that file to the list of
input files for plink.  This supports parameterized modules in
separately developed libaries.

* clulink changed the order of `-L' and `-l' options passed to the C
linker.  The order is: (1) user-specified `-L' options, (2) default
`-L' options, (3) user-specified `-l' options, and (4) default `-l'
options.  This used to be default options followed by user-specified
options.  Now user-specified library can refer modules in default
libraries.

* The `stream$putzero' operation has been implemented.

* Split compatibility library modules into a separate clucompat
package.

* ~CLU/lib/progargs.lib is gone.  Interface specifications on getopt,
input_streams, program_arguments, and program_name have been moved to
~CLU/lib/progenv.lib.

* New library modules: int_hex_parse, int_hex_unparse, int_oct_parse,
and int_oct_unparse (~CLU/lib/int.lib); getenv, system, and terminate
(~CLU/lib/progenv.lib); and uint (~CLU/lib/uint.lib).

* Typing `make install' automatically creates `basic.lib' at the end
of the installation process.

* Bug fixes.
